Design Document: tpt-chora (Full Scope)
Status: Definitive Architecture
Ecosystem: TPT (TPT Solutions)
Dependencies: tpt-archon (Substrate), tpt-eidos (Form/Layout/Semantics), tpt-telos (Logic/State)
1. Executive Summary
tpt-chora is the all-encompassing, proof-native, GPU-accelerated presentation, interaction, and media runtime for the TPT ecosystem. It entirely replaces the traditional browser rendering pipeline.
tpt-chora natively handles 2D/3D UI rendering, complex typography, spatial computing (XR), hardware-accelerated media, multi-modal input (touch, gaze, haptics), and OS-level accessibility. It operates strictly as the "receptacle," reading zero-copy memory from tpt-archon, consuming proven geometry and semantics from tpt-eidos, and executing stateful interactions via tpt-telos.
2. Core Architecture & Subsystems
tpt-chora is divided into six tightly integrated, concurrent subsystems. All subsystems share the same zero-copy memory space provided by tpt-archon.
2.1. The Core Rendering Engine (The Canvas)
The foundational GPU pipeline responsible for rasterizing geometry, managing framebuffers, and executing shaders.
API: wgpu (mapping to Vulkan, Metal, DX12, and WebGPU).
Render Graph: A frame-scoped, dependency-tracked render graph that automatically optimizes render passes, handles transient resources, and eliminates GPU pipeline stalls.
Vector Graphics: Native, GPU-accelerated resolution-independent vector rendering (replacing SVG). Bezier curves and paths are tessellated on the GPU using compute shaders.
Post-Processing: A built-in pipeline for bloom, depth of field, motion blur, and color grading, driven by tpt-eidos's visual constraints.
2.2. The Typography & Text Engine (The Voice)
Text rendering without a DOM is historically difficult. tpt-chora solves this with a fully GPU-driven, resolution-independent text pipeline.
Shaping & Layout: tpt-eidos handles the complex text shaping (kerning, ligatures, RTL/bidi algorithms) using a native Rust shaper (e.g., rustybuzz), proving that text fits within its allocated bounding box.
Rasterization (SDF): Fonts are pre-compiled into Signed Distance Field (SDF) atlases on the GPU. This allows text to be scaled infinitely without pixelation, using a single fragment shader.
Sub-pixel Rendering: Native support for LCD sub-pixel rendering and gamma-correct blending for crisp text on any display.
Complex Scripts: Full support for complex Indic, Arabic, and CJK scripts, handled natively without falling back to OS text rasterizers.
2.3. The Spatial & 3D Engine (The Depth)
tpt-chora is dimension-agnostic. It natively supports true 3D spatial computing, bridging the gap between flat screens and XR headsets.
Stereoscopic Rendering: Native support for dual-view rendering for VR/AR headsets, with automated asymmetric frustum projection.
Foveated Rendering: Integrates with eye-tracking to render high-resolution graphics only where the user is looking, drastically reducing GPU load.
Volumetric Lighting & Shadows: Real-time shadow mapping and global illumination calculated via GPU compute shaders, respecting the physical elevation property defined in tpt-eidos.
Spatial Audio: Integration with a 3D audio engine (e.g., rodio or native OpenAL bindings) where audio sources are mapped to 3D coordinates in the Chora-IR, automatically calculating HRTF (Head-Related Transfer Function) based on head tracking.
2.4. The Input & Interaction Engine (The Senses)
Abstracts all hardware inputs into a unified, capability-based event stream.
Device Abstraction: Unified handling of Mouse, Keyboard, Touch, Pen/Stylus, Gamepads, and XR Controllers.
Gaze & Gesture Tracking: Native integration with XR tracking APIs. "Click" is abstracted into a higher-level intent: Gaze + Pinch, Mouse Down, or Touch Tap.
Hit Testing: GPU-accelerated spatial hit testing. Instead of traversing a DOM tree, tpt-chora uses the depth buffer and bounding volume hierarchies (BVH) to instantly determine which 3D/2D component was interacted with.
Haptics: Direct routing of interaction events to OS-level haptic feedback APIs (CoreHaptics, Android Vibrator, XR Controller rumble).
2.5. The Accessibility & Semantics Engine (The Bridge)
This is the most critical subsystem for replacing the web. Without a DOM, screen readers and OS accessibility tools need a new target.
The Semantic Tree: tpt-eidos emits a parallel "Semantic IR" alongside the visual Chora-IR. This tree contains no visual data, only logical roles (Button, Heading, Text), states (Focused, Expanded), and relationships.
OS Bridging: tpt-chora maintains a live, two-way bridge to native OS accessibility frameworks (UIAutomation on Windows, Accessibility API on macOS, UIAutomator on Android).
Focus Management: A mathematically proven focus-traversal algorithm (handled by tpt-eidos) ensures that keyboard and switch-device navigation is logically sound and never traps the user.
2.6. The Media & Asset Pipeline (The Content)
Hardware-accelerated decoding and streaming of heavy assets.
Image Decoding: Asynchronous, multi-threaded decoding of JPEG, PNG, WebP, and AVIF directly into GPU-ready texture formats.
Video Playback: Integration with hardware video decoding APIs (VA-API, VideoToolbox, MediaCodec). Video frames are decoded directly into shared memory and mapped to GPU textures with zero-copy, enabling 4K/8K video playback with minimal CPU overhead.
Asset Streaming: Predictive asset loading. tpt-chora analyzes the Chora-IR and pre-fetches textures and meshes for components just outside the viewport.
3. Integration Contracts (The TPT Trinity)
How tpt-chora consumes the rest of the stack without breaking the zero-copy paradigm.
3.1. Consuming tpt-eidos (The Form)
tpt-eidos outputs two distinct Intermediate Representations (IR) per frame:

// 1. The Visual IR (Chora-IR) - Sent to the Core Rendering Engine
pub struct ChoraVisualNode {
    pub transform: Mat4,
    pub geometry: GpuMeshHandle,
    pub material: GpuMaterialHandle,
    pub clip_mask: GpuTextureHandle, // For complex clipping/masking
    pub z_depth: f32,
}

// 2. The Semantic IR (A11y-IR) - Sent to the Accessibility Engine
pub struct ChoraSemanticNode {
    pub role: AccessibilityRole, // Button, Link, Image, etc.
    pub label: StringId,         // Pointer to Archon string pool
    pub state: BitFlags,         // Focused, Disabled, Checked
    pub bounding_box_2d: Rect,   // For screen reader highlight boxes
    pub children: Vec<NodeId>,
}

3.2. Consuming tpt-archon (The Substrate)
tpt-chora never allocates its own UI state. It maps tpt-archon pages directly into GPU buffers.

// Zero-Copy GPU Buffer Mapping
impl ChoraRuntime {
    pub fn bind_state_to_gpu(&self, archon_page: &ArchonPage) -> GpuBuffer {
        // The GPU reads directly from Archon's page cache.
        // No serialization. No copying.
        self.gpu.create_buffer_mapped(archon_page.as_slice())
    }
}

3.3. Consuming tpt-telos (The Purpose)
When the Input Engine registers a hit (e.g., a user clicks a button), it doesn't trigger a DOM event. It triggers a tpt-telos state transition.

// Input Engine -> Telos
pub fn on_interaction(&mut self, event: InputEvent, target: NodeId) {
    // 1. Hit test confirms target is interactable (via Eidos proofs)
    // 2. Telos processes the intent
    let state_mutation = self.telos.process_event(target, event);
    
    // 3. Mutation is applied directly to Archon memory
    self.archon.apply_mutation(state_mutation);
    
    // 4. Next frame, Eidos re-proves layout, Chora re-renders.
}

4. Security, Sandboxing, & Capabilities
Because tpt-chora renders arbitrary UI (potentially from untrusted sources), it enforces a strict, mathematically verified capability model.
Viewport Isolation: No component can draw outside its tpt-eidos-proven bounding box. The GPU scissor test and stencil buffers are hardware-enforced per component.
Memory Capabilities: A component's shaders can only sample textures and read uniform buffers that its capability token explicitly allows.
No Global Z-Index: Depth is strictly hierarchical. A child component can only occlude its parent or siblings within its allocated Z-depth slice. There are no "pop-ups" that break the spatial hierarchy unless explicitly granted a "Modal" capability by tpt-telos.
Network & Filesystem Isolation: tpt-chora has zero network or filesystem capabilities. All data fetching is handled by tpt-archon's capability-based I/O subsystem. tpt-chora only renders the results.
5. Performance & Memory Model
tpt-chora is designed to guarantee 120fps (or 90fps in XR) with zero frame drops.
Zero Allocation in Render Loop: The entire render loop (from input processing to GPU command buffer submission) allocates zero bytes on the heap. All memory is pre-allocated in tpt-archon's page cache or GPU VRAM.
Double/Triple Buffering: State mutations in tpt-archon are written to a back-buffer. The GPU reads from the front-buffer. A lock-free atomic swap occurs at the vertical blank (VBlank), eliminating tearing and stutter.
Incremental Re-rendering: If only a single button's color changes, tpt-eidos emits a "dirty rect" (a small bounding box). tpt-chora only re-rasterizes and re-submits GPU commands for that specific region, leaving the rest of the frame untouched.
6. The Developer Experience (DX)
While the engine is built in Rust, the developer writes UI in tpt-eidos. tpt-chora provides the tooling to make this seamless.
The Chora Inspector: A built-in, overlay debugging tool (toggled via a keyboard shortcut or XR gesture). It allows developers to:
View the live Semantic (A11y) Tree.
Inspect the exact GPU draw calls and shader execution times.
Visualize the "dirty rects" and overdraw heatmaps.
Toggle forced color-blindness modes or high-contrast proofs to verify tpt-eidos accessibility constraints.
Hot Reloading: Because the UI is a pure function of tpt-archon state and tpt-eidos layout, changing an eidos file instantly recompiles the IR and updates the GPU pipelines without losing application state.
7. Conclusion
tpt-chora is not a compromise. It is the realization of a post-document web.
By unifying typography, 3D spatial rendering, hardware media, multi-modal input, and accessibility into a single, zero-copy, GPU-driven runtime, tpt-chora eliminates the technical debt of the last 30 years of web development. It provides the safety of tpt-eidos, the logic of tpt-telos, and the memory integrity of tpt-archon, delivering a universal, high-performance canvas for the next generation of computing.





1. Handling PCs with "No GPU" (or Low-End Hardware)
In 2026, almost every consumer device has some integrated GPU. However, we must account for headless servers, extremely old hardware, restricted embedded environments (like IoT), and low-power laptops.
tpt-chora handles this via a Three-Tier Fallback Strategy:
Tier 1: Software Rasterization (The CPU Fallback)
Because tpt-chora uses wgpu as its hardware abstraction layer, it automatically inherits wgpu's software fallbacks. If no hardware Vulkan, Metal, or DX12 adapter is found, tpt-chora seamlessly falls back to lavapipe (LLVMpipe) or DXC (DirectX Compute) software rasterization.
The Trade-off: It uses the CPU instead of the GPU. It will be slower, but the application will not crash. It guarantees that the UI remains functional on a 10-year-old office PC or a headless Raspberry Pi.
Tier 2: Headless / Server-Side Rendering
If tpt-chora is running on a cloud server (e.g., for automated UI testing, generating PDF reports, or streaming a UI to a thin client via WebRTC), it operates in Headless Mode.
It initializes a "null" windowing context (no physical display).
It renders directly into an off-screen memory framebuffer.
It outputs raw pixel data (PNG/JPEG/Video frames) over the network, consuming zero display resources.
Tier 3: Dynamic Fidelity (The tpt-eidos Performance Profiles)
If a weak GPU is detected, tpt-chora queries the hardware capabilities and instructs tpt-eidos to switch to a "Low Power" layout profile.
Shadows & Post-Processing: Disabled.
Typography: Drops from GPU-accelerated Signed Distance Field (SDF) fonts to standard, pre-rasterized bitmap font atlases.
Framerate: Caps at 30fps or 60fps to save battery.
Because tpt-eidos is a proof-native language, it can mathematically prove that the "Low Power" layout still satisfies all accessibility and structural constraints, just with fewer visual flourishes.
2. How to Make it Easy to Migrate Over
You cannot ask the world to throw away React, CSS, and HTML and rewrite everything in tpt-eidos and tpt-telos. Migration must be incremental, painless, and interoperable.
The "Trojan Horse" Strategy (Embeddable Canvas)
Do not launch tpt-chora as a standalone "TPT Browser." Launch it as an embeddable runtime.
We provide a Web Component: <tpt-chora>.
A developer can keep their existing React/Vue/HTML app, but replace just one highly complex, janky component (e.g., a massive data grid, a 3D product configurator, or a real-time video editor) with <tpt-chora>.
This proves the value of the stack immediately without requiring a total rewrite.
The "Rosetta Stone" (Legacy Web Transpiler)
To ease the transition, tpt-chora includes a compatibility layer that can parse standard HTML and CSS into the Chora-IR.
Developers can write standard CSS, and the tpt-eidos compiler will translate it into verified layout constraints.
If the CSS violates a safety proof (e.g., text overflow), the compiler throws a warning and auto-corrects it. This allows teams to migrate their existing stylesheets gradually, turning legacy CSS into verified tpt-eidos code over time.
FFI and WebAssembly Interop
Companies have millions of lines of existing business logic in JavaScript, Python, or Java.
tpt-telos natively supports WebAssembly (Wasm) and Foreign Function Interfaces (FFI).
A company can keep their existing backend logic compiled to Wasm, and tpt-telos will safely bridge the state between the Wasm module and the tpt-archon zero-copy memory. You don't have to rewrite your business logic to use the new UI.
3. Can it Run on Today's Infrastructure?
Yes. This is the most critical point: tpt-chora does not require a new internet. It is designed to be deployed using the exact same infrastructure that hosts today's web.
A. Deployment: Standard CDNs and Wasm
The compiled output of tpt-eidos and tpt-telos is not a proprietary binary. It compiles down to:
WebAssembly (Wasm) modules for the logic and layout solver.
WGSL (WebGPU Shading Language) or SPIR-V for the GPU shaders.
Binary assets (textures, SDF font atlases, 3D meshes).
These are standard file types. You host them on Cloudflare, AWS S3, Vercel, or Fastly exactly as you would host a React bundle. The browser or native app simply fetches them via standard HTTP/3.
B. The "WebGPU Bootstrap" (Running inside Chrome/Safari)
How does the user actually open it if we aren't building a custom browser? We use the existing browsers as dumb bootloaders.
By 2026, WebGPU is fully supported in Chrome, Edge, Safari, and Firefox.
We build a tiny, 500kb "TPT Bootstrap" script.
When a user visits a URL, the browser loads this tiny script.
The script initializes a <canvas> element, fetches the tpt-chora Wasm and WebGPU shaders from the CDN, and boots the tpt-chora runtime inside the canvas.
The Result: The user is technically in Chrome, but the DOM is completely bypassed. The browser is only acting as a network fetcher and a WebGPU context provider. The actual rendering, state, and layout are handled 100% by tpt-chora at native speeds.
C. Backend Infrastructure: Agnostic by Design
tpt-archon (the substrate) does not demand a proprietary database.
It includes native adapters for PostgreSQL, Redis, S3, and SQLite.
It speaks standard protocols: HTTP/3, gRPC, and WebSockets.
If a company uses tpt-chora for the frontend, they can keep their existing Node.js/Go/Rust backends and Postgres databases. tpt-archon simply acts as a highly optimized, zero-copy caching and state layer between the tpt-chora frontend and their legacy backend.
Summary: The Pragmatic Revolution
By designing tpt-chora with these constraints, we transform it from a fragile academic exercise into an unstoppable industry standard:
If you have no GPU: It falls back to CPU software rendering or headless mode. It never crashes.
If you want to migrate: You don't rewrite your app. You drop a <tpt-chora> web component into your existing React app, or use the CSS transpiler to gradually verify your existing styles.
If you want to deploy: You push Wasm and WebGPU shaders to Cloudflare. It runs inside the user's existing Chrome/Safari browser via WebGPU, bypassing the DOM without requiring them to install a new "TPT Browser."